

# A3 Writeup

## Design Decisions
In the spirit of the upcoming Summer Olympics, our team decided to use an Olympics dataset, specifically focusing on the sport of swimming. Initially our idea was to compare statistics across countries; however, we realized that focusing on individual athletes rather than country aggregates would provide more exploratory opportunities in an interactive visualization. Our main chart includes year on the y-axis and athletes represented as individual line segments, to convey the idea of swimmers in competition lanes. With this layout, the user can easily scan horizontally to see which swimmers competed in each year, scan vertically for the length of the line segments to see the duration of each swimmer’s career, and group swimmers by their NOC (essentially a country code) based on the line segment color.

To further facilitate exploration of this data, we provided two-way sliders so that users can zoom in on particular periods in history, choosing ranges for medals won and career length in order to see which athletes fulfill those criteria. A dropdown menu allows users to filter the data by NOC, examining one country in particular or comparing a select few. We included some animations between changes in these user-defined filters to enhance the perception of these transitions, although we plan to reduce the delay so that the animation does not become distracting. When users hover over an athlete’s line segment, a smaller chart immediately appears on the right, displaying more details about that athlete’s competition history and the medals that s/he won during their Olympic career. The type and number of the medals are encoded visually, using color (bronze/silver/gold) and number (circles stacked on top of each other), with minimal axis notation so that users can quickly and intuitively perceive this information. Lastly, we included a search bar so that users can conveniently search for an athlete they have in mind without having to hover over arbitrary line segments, although the lines are ordered alphabetically by last name to make this process easier.

## Development Process
Millicent began by cleaning the data using Jupyter Notebook, then transforming it into various .csv files suitable for our analysis needs. Jessica created the initial canvas with the dots on the timeline, then connected them into line segments and added the panning timeline functionality. Millicent did further data wrangling to enable the NOC dropdown selection. Michelle added the medal count slider as well as the search bar, and Bin added the slider for the swimmer career length. Melissa worked on the individual medal chart that appears on the side, first creating a grouped bar chart then transforming that into a chart with stacked circles instead. Millicent then added animations for some of the transitions while Jessica applied a website template and tweaked visual aesthetics. We all shared notes which Melissa then synthesized for the writeup. Throughout this process, we communicated via a group message chat, meeting up in person, as well as via video conference.

## Difficulties
Although we did not keep a detailed record, this project easily took more than 40 people-hours. First of all, we had to keep accounting for unanticipated features in the data, such as swimmers switching NOCs over the course of their career, or names like Cornelia "Cor" Aalten (-Strannood) and Michael Fred Phelps II not alphabetizing correctly due to unusual format. However, the data wrangling issues were minor in comparison with the challenge of web development. None of us had much web programming background, so we did not realize how complex or time consuming our interactive components would be. Whenever we wanted to add an additional feature, we had to continually refactor our code, rethink the way we transformed and structured our data, and deal with messy merge conflicts. Oftentimes, adding a new feature would create bugs in others; this is something that Michelle, Millicent, Jessica, and Bin especially had to deal with because they worked on a variety of filtering options that all interacted with the same graph. Melissa’s side chart had fewer dependency bugs, but it was still subject to the common difficulties of transforming the data into an appropriate structure, scaling and spacing the visual elements, and optimizing the code.
